

CHAPTER VII 


THE MEANING OF BEAUTY 

This I have here mentioned by the bye to show of what 
Consequence it is for Men to define their Words when 
there is Occasion. And it must be a great want of Inge¬ 
nuity (to say no more of it) to refuse to do it Since a 
Defimtion is the only way, whereby the precise Meamng 
of moral Words can be known —Locke 

" Disputes are multiplied, as if everything was uncer¬ 
tain, and these disputes are managed with the greatest 
warmth, as if everything was certain Amidst all this 
bustle 'tis not reason which gains the pnze, but elo¬ 
quence , and no man need ever despair of gaimng pro¬ 
selytes to the most extravagant hjrpothesis, who has art 
enough to represent it in any favourable colours The 
victory IS not gained by the men at arms, who manage the 
pike and sword , but by the trumpeters, drummers, and 
musicians of the army ."—Hume 

In order to test the value of the account of Definition 
given in the previous chapter, we may best select a 
subject which has hitherto proved notoriously refractory 
to definitive methods. Many intelligent people indeed 
have given up aesthetic speculation and take no interest 
in discussions about the nature or object of Art, because 
they feel that there is little likelihood of arriving at 
any definite conclusion. Authorities appear to differ 
so widely in their judgments as to which things are 
beautiful, and when they do agree there is no means 
of knowing what they are agreeing about. 

What in fact do they mean by Beauty? Prof. 
Bosanquet and Dr Santayana, Signor Croce and 
Clive Bell, not to mention Ruskin and Tolstoi, each 
in his own way dogmatic, enthusiastic and voluminous, 
each leaves his conclusions equally uncorrelated with 

139 



THE MEANING OF MEANING 


140 

those of his predecessors. And the judgmeiats of ex¬ 
perts on one another are no less at variance. But if 
there is no reason to suppose that people are talking 
about the same thing, a lack of correlation in their 
remarks need not cause surprise. We assume too 
readily that similar language involves similar thoughts 
and similar things thought of. Yet why should there 
be only one subject of investigation which has been 
called .Esthetics? Why not several fields to be separ¬ 
ately investigated, whether they are found to be con¬ 
nected or not? Even a Man of Letters, given time, 
should see that if we say with the poet: 

“ ‘ Beauty is Truth, Truth Beauty ’—that is all 
Ye know on earth, and all ye need to know," 

we need not be talking about the same thing as the 
author who says: 

" The hide of the rhinoceros may be admired for its fitness, 
but as it scarcely indicates vitality, it is deemed less beautiful 
than a skin which exhibits mutable effects of muscular elasticity " 

What reason is there to suppose that one aesthetic 
doctrine can be framed to include all the valuable kinds 
of what is called Literature. 

Yet, surprising though it may seem, the only author 
who appears to have expressly admitted this difficulty 
and recognized its importance is Rupert Brooke. “One 
of the perils attending on those who ask ‘What is Art?’ 
is,” he says, “ that they tend, as all men do, to find what 
they are looking for: a common quality in Art. . . . 
People who start m this way are apt to be a most 
intolerable nuisance both to critics and to artists. . . . 
Of the wrong ways of approaching the subject of ‘ Art,’ 
or even of any one art, this is the worst because it is 
the most harmful.” He proceeds to point out how 
“Croce rather naively begins by noting that ‘aesthetic’ 
has been used both for questions of Art and for per¬ 
ception. So he sets out to discover what meaning k 
can really have to apply to both. He takes it for the 



THE MEANING OF BEAUTY 


141 

one necessary condition a true answer about ‘Esthetics ’ 
must satisfy, that it shall explain how Art and Percep¬ 
tion are both included. Having found such an ex¬ 
planation, he is satisfied.” The same lively awareness 
of linguistic pitfalls which enabled Rupert Brooke 
wisely to neglect Croce also allowed him to detect the 
chink in Professor G. E. Moore’s panoply, and so to 
resist the inexorable logic of the Cambridge Realists, 
then at the height of their power. “ Psychologically,” 
he says, “they seem to me non-starters. In the first 
place I do not admit the claims of anyone who says 
'There ts such a thing as Beauty, because when a 
man says, “This is beautiful,” he does not mean “This 
is lovely.” ’ . . . I am not concerned with what men 
may mean. They frequently mean, and have meant, 
the most astounding things. It is, possibly, true that 
when men say, ‘ This is beautiful ’ they do not mean 
‘This is lovely.’ They may mean that the aesthetic 
emotion exists. My only comments are that it does 
not follow that the aesthetic emotion does exist; and 
that, as a matter of fact, they are wrong.”* 

His own sympathies, at least as they appear in the 
volume from which we quote, were with views of type 
XI. in the list given below, though he does not seem 
to have considered the matter very deeply, and had no 
opportunity of'following up the promise of his admirable 
approach. 

Whenever we have any experience which might be 
called ‘aesthetic,’ that is whenever we are enjoying, 
contemplating, admiring or appreciating an obj'ect, 
there are plainly different parts of the situation on 
which emphasis can be laid. As we select one or other 
of these so we shall develop one or other of the main 
aesthetic doctrines. In this choice we shall, in fact, be 

* John Webster and the Eheabethan Drama, pp 1-7 

Rupert Brooke clearly did not understand that the argument here 
being refuted professed to supply a proof not of existence but of sub¬ 
sistence Common sense, however, sometimes succeeds where logical 
acumen overreaches itself 



142 


THE MEANING OF MEANING 


deciding which of the main Types of Definition we are 
employing. Thus we may begin with the object itself; 
or with other things such as Nature, Genius, Perfection, 
The Ideal, or Truth, to which it is related ; or with its 
effects upon us. We may begin where we please, the 
important thing being that we should know and make 
clear which of these approaches it is that we are taking, 
for the objects with which we come to deal, the referents 
to which we refer, if we enter one field will not as a rule 
be the same as those in another. Few persons will be 
equally interested in all, but some acquaintance with 
them will at least make the interests of other people 
more intelligible, and discussion more profitable. 
Differences of opinion and differences of interest in these 
matters are closely interconnected, but any attempt at a 
general synthesis, premature perhaps at present, must 
begin by disentangling them. 

We have then to make plain the method of Defini¬ 
tion which we are employing. The range of useful 
methods is shown in the following table of definitions, 
most of which represent traditional doctrines, while 
others, not before emphasized, render the treatment 
approximately complete. It should be remarked that 
the uses of ‘ beautiful ’ here tabulated are not by any 
means fully stated. Any definition is sufficiently explicit 
if it enables an intelligent reader to identify the reference 
concerned. A full formulation in each of these cases 
would occupy much space and would show that the 
field of the beautiful is for some of them more extensive 
than that of works of art, while certain restrictions, 
such as those which would exclude the Police from 
No. VIII., for example, will readily occur to the 
reader. 


I A nythtng is beautiful—which possesses the simple 
quality of beauty. 

II Anything is beautiful—which has a specified 
- Form. 



THE MEANING OF BEAUTY 


143 


III Anything ts beautiful—which is an imitation of 

Nature. 

IV Anything is beautiful—which results from suc¬ 

cessful exploitation of a Medium. 

V Anything is beautiful—which is the work of 
Genius, 




VI 


VII 

VIII 

, IX 

[ 


XIII 


XIV 

XV 


XVI 




Anything is beautiful—which reveals Truth, 

(2) the Spirit of Nature, (3) the Ideal, (4) 
the Universal, (5) the Typical. 

Anything is beautiful—which produces Illusion. 

Anything is beautiful—which leads to desirable 
Social effects. 

A nything is beautiful—which is an Expression, 

Anything is beautiful—which causes Pleasure. 

Anything is beautiful—which exates Emotions. 

Anything is beautiful—which promotes a Specific 
emotion. 

Anything is beautiful—which involves the pro¬ 
cesses of Empathy. 

Anything is beautiful—which heightens Vitality. 

Anything is beautiful—which brings us into 
touch with exceptional Personalities. 

Anything is beautiful—whwh induces Synas- 
thesis.^ 


It will be, noticed that each of these definitions 
illustrates one or more of the fundamental defining 
relations discussed in the last chapter. Thus, the 
definitions in Group C, Definitions X.-XVL, are all 
in terms of the efiects of things upon consciousness 
and so are cases of type VII. Of the two definitions in 
Group A, the first is a case of simple naming, type I. 
We postulate a quality Beauty, name it, and trust the 
identification of this mythological referent to the 
magical efficacy of our name. The discussion of the 


^ A detailed discussion of the views defined in these ways is provided 
in The Foundations of Xsthetics by the authors and Mr JsLmes Wood 
(1921. Second Edition, 1926) , and a snrvey of the most recent work 
in the light of the above classification will be found in the Encyclopeedta 
Brtlanntca, Thirteenth Edition, New Volumes (1926). ",®sthetics " 



144 


THE MEANING OF MEANING 


Beautiful in terms of an intrinsic quality Beauty is in 
fact an excellent example of the survival of primitive 
word-superstitions, and of the risks run by any discus¬ 
sion which is symbolically uncritical. The second 
Definition (II.), by Form, is either Spatial or Temporal 
according to the Art to which it is applied. If any 
others than these relations seem to be involved on any 
occasion, we shall find on examination that the defini¬ 
tion has had its starting-point surreptitiously changed 
and has become actually psychological, a change which 
can easily occur in this field, without any immediately 
apparent change in the symbolism. As a glaring 
instance the use of the word ‘great’ in literary and 
artistic criticism shows this process, the transition, 
without symbolic indication, from the ‘ objective ’ to the 
‘ subjective ’ as they used to be called. 

The Definitions in Group B are all more or less 
complex. 

Both Imitation (III.), and Exploitation (IV.), the 
definition by reference to the capacities of the medium, 
are evidently compounded of Causation, Similarity, 
Cognizing and Willing Relations; Exploitation being 
in fact as fine an instance as can be found of a complex 
definition easy to understand in its condensed short¬ 
hand form and difficult or impossible to analyse. Few 
people, however, will suffer any temptation to postulate 
a special property of being an exploitation, though 
such devices are the penalty we usually have to pay for 
convenient short cuts in our symbolization. 

The other definitions of Group B offer similar 
problems in analysis. The degree to which routes of 
type VIII., mental attitudes of believing (VI. and VII.) 
or approving (VIII.), appear is an interesting feature, 
which again helps to account for the tendency of such 
views to become psychological (Group C). Thus 
definition XVI. tends to absorb and replace VI. ; and 
XV. in a refined and explicit form often supersedes V. 
These variations in reference, even for definitions of 



THE MEANING OF BEAUTY 145 

symbols specially provided to control such inconstancy, 
serve to remind us of the paramount importance of 
Canon IV. for all discussion. The use of a symbolic 
theory of definition lies not in any guarantee which it 
can offer against ambiguity, but in the insight which it 
can give as to what, since we are using symbols, will 
be happening; and in the means provided of detecting 
and correcting those involuntary wanderings of the 
reference which are certain in all discourse to occur. 

In the case of the above definitions our ‘starting- 
points,’ synaesthesis, specific emotion, desirable social 
effects, etc., are plainly themselves arrived at by 
intricate processes of definition. For the particular 
purposes for which definitions of ‘ beautiful ’ are likely 
to be drawn up these starting-points can be assumed to 
be agreed upon, and the methods by which such 
agreement can be secured are the same for ‘ emotion ’ 
or ‘ pleasure,’ as for ‘ beautiful ’ itself. 

Equally we can proceed from these definitions or 
from any one of them, to terms cognate (Ugliness, 
Prettiness, Sublimity) or otherwise related (Art, 
.^Esthetic Decoration), and to define these in their turn 
we may take as starting-points either some one of the 
now demarcated fields of the beautiful and say:— 
.^Esthetics is the study of the Beautiful, or:—Art is 
the professed'attempt to produce Beauty, or we may 
return to our starting-point for the definition of Beauty 
and box the compass about it. 

The fields indicated by the above definitions may in 
some cases be co-extensive, e.g., V. and XV.; or they 
may partially overlap, e.g., X. and XIII. ; or they may 
be mutually exclusive, a condition not realized here 
or indeed in any probable discussion. The question 
whether two such fields do co-extend, do overlap or do 
exclude, is one to be decided by detailed investigation 
of the referents included in the fields. The ranges of 
overlap between fields, in fact, give rise to the special 
empirical problems of the sciences. Thus, for instance. 



146 THE MEANING OF MEANING 

we 6nd that beautiful things defined as Imitations of 
Nature (III.) only coincide with beautiful things defined 
as producers of Illusion (VII.) under certain strict 
conditions among which is to be found the condition 
that neither shall be included in the range defined by 
IV. The investigation of such correlations and the 
conditions to which they are subject is the business of 
iSsthetic as a science. 

The advantage of a grammatically extensional form 
for the definitions is that, so put, the symbols we use 
are least likely to obscure the issues raised, by making 
questions which are about matters of fact into puzzling 
conundra concerning the interlinking of locutions. 

The fields reached by these various approaches can 
all be cultivated and most of them are associated with 
well-known names in the Philosophy of Art. 

Let us, then, suppose that we have selected one 
of these fields and cultivated it to the best of our 
ability; for what reasons was it selected rather than 
some other? For if we approach the subject in the 
spirit of a visitor to the Zoo, who, knowing that all 
the creatures in a certain enclosure are ' reptiles,’ seeks 
for the common property which distinguishes them as 
a group from the fish in the Aquarium, mistakes may 
be made. We enter, for example, Burlington House, 
and, assuming that all the objects there collected are 
beautiful, attempt similarly to establish some common 
property. A little consideration of how they came there 
might have raised serious doubts; but if, after the 
manner of many aestheticians, we persist, we may even 
make our discovery of some relevant common property 
appear plausible. 

We have seen (pp. 124-5) how widely such a re¬ 
spected word as ‘ good ’ may wander, and there are good 
reasons for supposing that ‘ beauty ’ will not be more 
faithful to one particular kernel of reference. In dis¬ 
cussion we must in fact always bear in mind that there 
IS an indefinitely large number of ways in which any 



THE MEANING OF BEAUTY 


147 

symbol may acquire derivative uses; any similarity, 
any analogy may provide a sufficient reason for an 
extension of ‘ meaning,’ or semantic shift. It no more 
follows that the two or more symbols which it then 
becomes (cf. p. 91) will stand for referents with some 
relevant common property, than it would follow from 
the common name of a man’s step-mother and his 
daughter-in-law that they share his gout or his passion 
for the turf. 

If, therefore, terms such as Beauty are used in dis¬ 
cussion for the sake of their emotive value, as is usually 
the case, confusion will inevitably result unless it is 
constantly realized that words so used are indefinable, 
t.;., admit of no substitution, there being no other 
equally effective stimulus-word. Such indefinable uses 
are no doubt what have often led to the assumption of 
a simple quality of Beauty (Definition I) to account for 
verbal difficulties; as was also suggested above in the 
case of Good (p. 125). If, on the other hand, the term 
Beauty be retained as a short-hand substitute, for some 
one among the many definitions which we have elicited, 
this practice can only be justified as a means of indicat¬ 
ing by a Word of Power that the experience selected 
is regarded as of outstanding importance; or as a 
useful low-level shorthand. 

In additid'n to providing a test case for any general 
technique of definition a consideration of the problem 
of Beauty is perhaps the best introduction to the ques¬ 
tion of the diverse functions of language. As is well 
known, those whose concern with the arts is most direct 
often tend to deprecate a scientific approach as being 
likely to impair appreciation. This opinion if carefully 
examined will be found to be a typical symptom of 
a confusion as to the uses of language so constantly 
present in all discussions that its general recognition 
would be one of the most important results which a 
science of symbolism could yield. 

If we compare a body of criticism relating to any 



148 THE MEANING OF MEANING 

of the arts with an equally accredited body of remarks 
dealing with, let us say, physics or physiology, we 
shall be struck by the frequency, even in the best 
critics, of sentences which it is impossible to understand 
tn the same way as we endeavour to understand those 
of physiologists. “ Beautiful words are the veiy and 
peculiar light of the mind,” said Longinus. According 
to Coleridge “the artist must imitate that which is 
within the thing, that which is active through form 
and figure, and discourses to us by symbols—the Natur- 
getst, or spirit of nature.” “ Poetry,” Dr Bradley 
writes, “is a spirit. It comes we know not whence. 
It will not speak at our bidding, ncr answer in our 
language. It is not our servant; it is our master.”^ 
And Dr Mackail is even more rhapsodic: “Essentially 
a continuous substance or energy, poetry is historically 
a connected movement, a series of successive integral 
manifestations. Each poet, from Homer to our own 
day, has been to some extent and at some point, the 
voice of the movement and energy of poetry ; in him 
poetry has for the moment become visible, audible, 
incarnate, and his extant poems are the record left of 
that partial and transitory incarnation. . . . The 
progress of poetry . . . is immortal.” * 

No one who was not resolved to waste his time 
would for long try to interpret these remarks in the 
same way as he would, let us say, an account of the 
circulation of the blood. And yet it would be a mistake 
to regard them as not worth attention. It is clear that 
they require a different mode of approach. Whether 
their authors were aware of the fact or not, the use of 
words of which these are examples is totally distinct 
from the scientific use. The point would be made still 
more plain, if sentences from poetry were used for the 
experiment. What is certain is that there is a common 
and important use of words which is different from the 

* Oxford Lectures on Poetry, p 27 

* Lectures on Poetry, pp xi, xiii 



THE MEANING OF BEAUTY 149 

scientific or, as we shall call it, the strict symbolic use 
of words. 

In ordinary everyday speech each phrase has not 
one but a number of functions. We shall in our final 
chapter classify these under five headings; but here a 
twofold division is more convenient, the division 
between the symbohc use of words and the emotive use. 
The symbolic use of words is statement; the recording, 
the support, the organization and the communication of 
references. The emotive use of words is a more simple 
matter, it is the use of words to express or excite feel¬ 
ings and attitudes. It is probably more primitive. If 
we say “ The height of the Eiffel Tower is 900 feet” we 
are making a statement, we are using symbols in order 
to record or communicate a reference, and our symbol 
is true or false in a strict sense and is theoretically 
verifiable. But if we say “ Hurrah 1 ” or “ Poetiy is 
a spirit” or “ Man is a worm,” we may not be making 
statements, not even false statements; we are most 
probably using words merely to evoke certain attitudes. 

Each of these contrasted functions has, it will be 
seen, two sides, that of the speaker and that of the 
listener. Under the symbolic function are included 
both the symbolization of reference and its communica¬ 
tion to the listener, t.e., the causing in the listener of 
a similar reference. Under the emotive function are 
included both the expression of emotions, attitudes, 
moods, intentions, etc., in the speaker, and their com¬ 
munication, their evocation in the listener. As 
there is no convenient verb to cover both expression 
and evocation, we shall in what follows often use the 
term ‘ evoke ’ to cover both sides of the emotive function, 
there being no risk of misunderstanding. In many 
cases, moreover, emotive language is used by the 
speaker not because he already has an emotion which 
he desires to express, but solely because he is seeking 
a word which will evoke an emotion which he desires 
to have ; nor, of course, is it necessary for the speaker 



150 THE MEANING OF MEANING 

himself to experience the emotion which he attempts 
to evoke. 

It is true that some element of reference probably 
enters, for all civilized adults* at least, into almost all 
use of words, and it is always possible to import a 
reference, if it be only a reference to things in general. 
The two functions under consideration usually occur 
together but none the less they are in principle distinct. 
So far as words are used emotively no question as to 
their truth in the strict sense can directly arise. In¬ 
directly, no doubt, truth in this strict sense is often 
involved. Very much poetry consist of statements, 
symbolic arrangements capable of truth or falsity, 
which are used not for the sake of their truth or falsity 
but for the sake of the attitudes which their acceptance 
will evoke. For this purpose it fortunately happens, 
or rather it is part of the poet’s business to make it 
happen, that the truth or falsity matters not at all to 
the acceptance. Provided that the attitude or feeling 
is evoked the most important function of such language 
is fulfilled, and any symbolic function that the words 
may have is instrumental only and subsidiary to the 
evocative function. 

This subtle interweaving of the two functions is 
the main reason why recognition of their difference is 
not universal. The best test of whether our use of 
words is essentially symbolic or emotive is the 
question—“ Is this true or false in the ordinary strict 
scientific sense?” If this question is relevant then 
the use is symbolic, if it is clearly irrelevant then we 
have an emotive utterance. 

But in applying this test we must beware of two 

^ It IS desirable to make the reservation, if only for educational 
purposes, for according to some authorities " ninety-nine per cent 
of the -words used in talking to a little child have no meaning for him, 
except that, as the expression of attention to him, they please him *' 
Moreover, before the age of six or seven children " cannot hold a meaning 
before their minds -without experiencing it in perceptual symbols, 
whether words or otherwise Hence the natural desire of the child 

to talk or be talked to, if he is asked even for a few minutes to sit 
still ”—(W E. Urwick The Child's Mind, pp 95, 102 ) 



THE MEANING OF BEAUTY 151 

dangers. There is a certain type of mind which 
although it uses evocative language itself cannot on 
reflection admit such a thing, and will regard the 
question as relevant upon all occasions. For a larger 
body of readers than is generally supposed poetry is 
unreadable for this reason. The other danger is more 
important. Corresponding in some degree to the strict 
sense of true and false for symbolic statements (True®), 
there are senses which apply to emotive utterances 
(True®). Critics often use True® of works of art, where 
alternative symbols would be ‘ convincing ’ in some 
cases, ‘ sincere ’ in others, ‘ beautiful ’ in others, and so 
on. And this is commonly done without any awareness 
that True® and True® are different symbols. Further 
there is a purely evocative use of True—its use to 
excite attitudes of acceptance or admiration ; and a 
purely evocative use of False—to excite attitudes of 
distrust or disapprobation. When so used these 
words, since they are evocative, cannot, except by 
accident, be replaced by others ; a fact which explains 
the common reluctance to relinquish their employment 
even when the inconvenience of having symbols so 
alike superficially as True® and True® in use together 
is fully recognized. In general that affection for a 
word even when it is admitted to be ambiguous, 
which is subh a common feature of discussion, is very 
often due to its emotive efficiency rather than to any 
real difficulty in finding alternative symbols which will 
support the same reference. It is, however, not always 
the sole reason, as we shall see when we come in our 
final chapter to consider the condition of word- 
dependence. 

This disparity of function between words as 
supports or vehicles of reference and words as expres¬ 
sions or stimulants of attitudes has, in recent years, 
begun to receive some attention, for the most part from 
a purely grammatical standpoint. That neglect of 
the effects of our linguistic procedure upon all our 



152 


THE MEANING OF MEANING 


other activities which is so characteristic of linguists 
has, however, deprived such studies as have been made 
of most of their value. G. von der Gabelentz for 
instance, though he declares that “ Language serves a 
man not only to express something but also to express 
himself,” seems in no way to have considered what 
extreme consequence this intermingling of functions 
has for the theory as well as for the form of language. 
And to take the most recent work upon the subject, 
Vendryes, in his chapter upon Affective Language, 
keeps equally strictly to the grammarian’s standpoint. 
“The logical element and the affective element,” he 
says, “ mingle constantly in language. Except for 
technical languages, notably the scientific languages, 
which are by definition outside life, the expression of 
an idea is never exempt from a nuance of sentiment.” 
“These sentiments have no interest for the linguist 
unless they are expressed by linguistic means. But 
they generally remain outside language; they are like 
a light vapour which floats above the expression of the 
thought without altering its grammatical form,” etc. 
The two chief ways in which the affective side of 
language concerns the linguist he finds, first in its 
effect upon the order of words and secondly as deter¬ 
mining the vocabulary. Many words are dropped or 
retained, for affective reasons. “It is by the action of 
affectivity that the instability of grammars is to a great 
extent to be explained. The logical idea! for a 
grammar would be to have an expression for each 
function and only one function for each expression. 
This ideal supposes for its realization that the language 
is fixed like an algebra, where a formula once estab¬ 
lished remains without change in all the operations 
in which it is used. But phrases are not algebraic 
formulae. Affectivity always envelops and colours the 
logical expression of the thought. We never repeat 
the same phrase twice ; we never use the same word 
twice with the same value ; there are never two abso- 



THE MEANING OF BEAUTY 


153 


lutely identical linguistic facts. This is due to the 
circumstances which ceaselessly modify the conditions 
of our affectivity. ” ^ 

It is perhaps unfair to ask from grammarians some 
consideration of the wider aspects of language. They 
have their own difficult and laborious subject to occupy 
aU their attention. Yet from a book the promise of 
which was the cause cf the abandonment by Couturat 
of his projected “Manual of the logic of language” 
a more searching inquiry might be expected. It still 
remains true that linguists, of whom M. Vendryes is 
one of the most distinguished, abound, but investigators 
into the theory of language are curiously lacking.’ 

From the philosophical side also, the speculative 
approach to this duality of the symbolic and evocative 
functions has been made recently under various dis¬ 
guises. All such terms as Intuition, Intellect, Emotion, 
Freedom, Logic, Immediacy, are already famous for 
their power to confuse and frustrate discussion. 
In general, any term or phrase, ‘ elan vital,’ ‘ purely 
logical analysis’ . . . which is capable of being 
used either as a banner’ or as a bludgeon, or as 
both, needs, if it is to be handled without disaster, a 
constant and conscious understanding of these, two 
functions of language. It is useless to try to sterilize 
our instruments without studying the habits of the 
bacteria. Not even mathematics is free as a whole 
from emotive complications; parts of it seem to be, 
but the ease with which mathematicians turn into 
mystics (“Even were there no things at all, there 
would still be the property of being divisible by 107 ”) 

^ Le Langage (1922), pf> 163, 165, 182 E T., Language (1924), 
Part II, ClUpter IV 

* An exception might be made of Professor Delacroix, who m his 
{op ctt ) Le Langage et la Pensie (1924) devotes considerable space to 
the subject, but teeats the emotive function in a purely academic 
spirit without more regard for its far-reaching effects upon discussion 
than the Logical Positivists (cf Carnap, The Logical Syntax of 
Language, 19.17) 

* Cl Nietzsche’s dictum " Words relating to values are merely 
banners planted on those spots where a new blessedness was discovered 
—a new feelmg." 



THE MEANING OF MEANING 


154 

when they consider its foundations, shows what the 
true situation is. 

One of the best known of these disguised discussions 
of the emotive function of language centres about the 
teaching of Bergson on the nature of knowledge. To 
quote from a recent exposition: “The business of 
philosophy, according to Bergson, is not to explain 
reality, but to know it. For this a different kind of 
mental effort is required. Analysis and classification, 
instead of increasing our direct knowledge, tend rather 
to diminish it.”‘ As Bergson himself says' “From 
the infinitely vast field of our virtual knowledge we 
have selected, to turn into actual knowledge, whatever 
concerns our action upon things; the rest we have 
neglected.”* And as his expositor continues: “The 
attitude of mind required for explaining the facts 
conflicts with that which is required for knowing them. 
From the point of view simply of knowing, the facts 
are all equally important and we cannot afford to 
discriminate, but for explanation some facts are very 
much more important than others. When we want to 
explain, therefore, rather than simply to know, we tend 
to concentrate our attention upon these practically 
important facts and pass over the rest.” “ 

The processes of explanation as described by 
Bergson bear a close resemblance to what we have 
called reference when this is supported by symbolism. 
Owing to his peculiar view of memory, however, he is 
unable to make the use of mnemic phenomena which, 
as we have seen, is essential if mysticism, even as 
regards this kind of ‘ knowledge ’ is to be avoided. 

The other kind of knowledge, ‘ virtual knowledge,’ 
the knowledge which is ‘creative duration,’ the only 
kind of knowledge of ‘ really real reality ’ Bergsonians 
will allow, is, as he presents it, unavoidably mystical. 

1 K Stephen, The Misuse of Mind, p 19 
‘ Bergson, La Perception du Changement, p 12 
• K Stephen, op at., p 22 



THE MEANING OF BEAUTY 


155 

Not only because any description of it must involve 
the expositor in self-contradiction—as we have seen 
any repudiation of orthodox symbolic machinery has 
this consequence^—but also because it requires an 
initial act of faith in the existence of a vast world of 
‘virtual knowledge’ which is actually unknown. None 
the less, those who have no such faith, and merely 
follow the advice of Bergsonians to neglect the actual 
terms in the descriptions given and to perform instead 
an ‘act of synthesis,’ can easily become persuaded that 
they understand what ‘ virtual knowledge ’ is, and even 
that they can possess it. 

We have above (p. 81) insisted that knowledge in 
the sense of reference is a highly indirect affair, and 
hinted that though we often feel an objection to admit¬ 
ting that our mental contact with the world is neither 
close nor full, but on the contrary distant and schematic, 
our reluctance might be diminished by a consideration 
of our non-cognitive contacts. These, too, are for the 
most part indirect, but they are capable of much greater 
fullness. The more clear and discriminating reference 
becomes, the slighter, relatively to similar but cruder 
reference, is our link with what we are referring to— 
the more specialized and exquisite the context involved. 
With all that Bergson has to say about the tendency 
for precise, discriminating, analytic attention to whittle 
down our connection with what we are attending to, we 
can agree. Bergson, moreover, has well emphasized 
the part played by language in reinforcing and ex- 
aggerating this tendency. Thinking casually of conies, 
the context involved may be of immense complexity, 
since a large part of our past experience with these 
animals is operative. Thinking discriminatingly of 
the same objects as ‘small deer,’ our context becomes 
specialized, and only those features of conies need be 
involved which they share with their co-members of the 

^ Mrs Stephen wntes with great lucidity upon this question Cl, 
especially pp 57-61 



156 THE MEANING OF MEANING 

class in question. The others need not be lost, but we 
can agree that there is a strong tendency for them to 
disappear, and in any really difficult feats of discrimina¬ 
tion they will certainly be best omitted. 

At the extreme of consciousness most removed from 
analytic and abstract attention we have not one but a 
variety of possible states, according to the kind and 
extent of the contexts, to which the experience in 
question belongs. The state may be comparatively 
simple, as when we are engaged in some ordinary 
perceptual activity, such as throwing dice ; or it may 
be predominantly emotional; or leaping for our lives 
from the onrush of motor cyclists we ma)' again 
experience simple throbs of pure unsophisticated ex¬ 
perience. But certain of these concrete, immediate, 
unintellectualized phases of life have in their own 
right a complexity and richness which no intellectual 
activities can equal. Amongst these assthetic experi¬ 
ences figure prominently. Many to whom Bergson’s 
recommendation of immediacy, and his insistence upon 
the treasures awaiting those who regain it, make their 
appeal will admit that this is because he seems to them 
to be describing what happens when they are most 
successful in artistic contemplation. We cannot enter 
here into the details of what, from the standpoint of 
more or less conventional psychology, may be supposed 
to happen in these states of synaesthesis.^ What, 
however, from this standpoint is indisputable is that 
the more important of them derive their value from 
the peculiar fashion in which impulses formed by and 
representing the past experience of the contemplator 
are set working. 

Thus in a quite precise sense, though one which 
can only be somewhat elaborately formulated, the states 
of aesthetic contemplation owe their fullness and rich¬ 
ness to the action of memory; not memory narrowed 

* Those who desire to pursue the matter may be referred to The 
Foundations of Esthetics, cited above 



THE MEANING OF BEAUTY 157 

down and specialized as is required in reference, but 
memory operating in a freer fashion to widen and 
amplify sensitiveness. In such conditions we are open 
to a more diffused and more heterogeneous stimulation, 
because the inhibitions which normally canalize our 
responses are removed. 

Partly because of certain of the felt characters of 
the states we have been describing, a sense of repose 
and satisfaction not unlike the repose which follows 
a successful intellectual effort, though due to quite 
different causes—partly for other reasons, it is not 
surprising that these states should have been often 
described as states of knowledge. The temptation to 
a philosopher when concerned with a subject in which 
he feels a passionate interest, to use all the words which 
are most likely to attract attention and excite belief in 
the importance of the subject is almost irresistible. 
Thus, any state of mind in which anyone takes a great 
interest is very likely to be called ‘ knowledge,’ because 
no other word in psychology has such evocative virtue. 
If this state of mind is very unlike those usually so 
called, the new “knowledge” will be set in opposition to 
the old and praised as of a superior, more real, and more 
essential nature. These periodic raids upon aesthetics 
have been common in the history of philosophy. The 
crowning instance of Kant, and the attempted annexa¬ 
tion of aesthetics by Idealism are recent examples. 

The suggestion is reasonable, therefore, that when 
the pseudo-problems due to cross vocabularies are 
removed and the illusory promise of a new heaven 
and a new earth, which Bergsonians somewhat weakly 
hold out, has been dismissed, the point at issue in the 
intuitionist-intellectualist controversy will be found to 
be removable by an understanding of the dual function, 
symbolic as well as emotive, of the word ‘knowledge.’ 
To deny that ‘ virtual knowledge ’ is in the symbolic 
sense knowledge is in no way derogatory to the state 
(according to the view here maintained, a state, or set 



158 THE MEANING OF MEANING 

of states, of specially free response to stimulation) 
called by that name. It is merely to apply a rule which 
all those who are aware of the functions of language 
will support, namely, that in discussion, where 
symbolic considerations are supposed to be prior to all 
others, the evocative advantages of terms are only to 
be exploited when it is certain that symbolically no 
disadvantage can result. 

But a more general consciousness of the nature of 
the two functions is necessary if they are to be kept 
from interfering with one another; and especially all 
the verbal disguises, by which each at times endeavours 
to pass itself off as the other, need to be exposed. It 
ought to be impossible to pretend that any scientific 
statement can give a more inspiring or a more profound 
‘vision of reality’ than another. It can be more 
general or more useful, and that is all. On the other 
hand it ought to be impossible to talk about poetry 
or religion as though they were capable of giving 
‘knowledge,’ especially since ‘knowledge’ as a term 
has been so overworked from both sides that it is 
no longer of much service. A poem—or a religion, 
though religions have so definitely exploited the con¬ 
fusion of function which we are now considering, and 
are so dependent upon it, as to be unmistakably patho¬ 
logical growths—has no concern with limited and 
directed reference. It tells us, or should tell us, nothing. 
It has a different, though an equally important and a 
far more vital function—to use an evocative term in 
connection with an evocative matter. What it does, 
or should do, is to induce a fitting* attitude to experi- 

^ Instead of ' fitting' we might have said ' valuable ' But since 
the value of an attitude depends in part upon the other attitudes 
which are possible and in part upon the degree to which it leaves open 
the possibility of other attitudes for other circumstances, we use the 
term ‘ fitting ', not, however, to imply any narrow code of the proper 
attitudes to be adopted upon all occasions The term ' attitude ’ 
should throughout this discussion be understood in a wide sense, as 
covering all the ways in which impulses may be set ready for action, 
including those peculiar settings from whicm no overt action results, 
often spoken of as the * aesthetic moods ' or ' aesthetic emotions ' 



THE MEANING OF BEAUTY 159 

ence. But such words as ‘fitting,’ ‘suitable’ or 
‘appropriate’ are chilly, having little or no evocative 
power. Therefore those who care most for poetiy and 
who best understand its central and crucial value, tend 
to resent such language as unworthy of its subject. 
From the evocative standpoint they are justified. But 
once the proper separation of these functions is made 
it will be plain that the purpose for which such terms 
are used, namely to give a strictly symbolic description 
of the function of poetry, for many reasons^ the 
supreme form of emotive language, cannot conflict 
with the poetic or evocative appraisal of poetry, with 
which poets as poets are concerned. 

Further, the exercise of one function need not, if 
the functions are not confused^ in any way interfere with 
the exercise of the other. The sight of persons irritated 
with science because they care for poetry (“ Whatever 
the sun may be, it is certainly not a ball of flaming gas,” 
cries D. H. Lawrence), or of scientists totally immune 
from the influences of civilization, becomes still more 
regrettable when we realize how unnecessary it is. 
As science frees itself from the emotional outlook, and 
modern physics is becoming something in connection 
with which attitudes seem rather de trop, so poetry 
seems about to return to the conditions of its greatness, 
by abandoning the obsession of knowledge and sym¬ 
bolic truth. It IS not necessary to know what things 
are in order to take up fitting attitudes towards them, 
and the peculiarity of the greatest attitudes which art 
can evoke is their extraordinary width. The de.scrip- 
tion and ordering of such attitudes is the business of 
aesthetics. The evaluation of them, needless to say, 
must rest ultimately upon the opinions of those best 
qualified to be judges by the range and delicacy of 
their experience and their freedom from irrelevant 
preoccupations. 

1 Cf Chapter X , pp 239-240 infra, also Principles of Literary CrtA> 
cism. Chapters XXIII -XXXV 



CHAPTER VIII 

THE MEANING OF PHILOSOPHERS 


What do you read, my lord ?— Polonius. 

Words, words, words — Hamlet. 

“ O wondrous power of words, by simple faith 
Licensed to take the meaning that we love.” 

Thus the poet; and observation does not invalidate 
the perspicacious remark. It might, however, have 
been supposed that logicians and psychologists would 
have devoted special attention to meaning, since it is 
so vital for all the issues with which they are concerned. 
But that this is not the case will be evident * to anyone 
who studies the Symposium in Mind (October 1920 and 
following numbers) on “The Meaning of ‘Meaning.’” 

It is perhaps unnecessary to point out that such 
brief extracts from lengthy philosophical disquisitions 
as the limits of this chapter allow, cannot fairly represent 
any given author’s views upon that, whatever it may 
be, if anything, for which he uses the word ‘ meaning.’ 
Some quotations, however, do tell their own tale; but 
even where no actual absurdity transpires, the resort 

* The foUowmg passage m Nuces Phtlosopktcee, by one Edward 
Johnson, published in 1842, is worth recalhng. 

" A I confess I am surprised that all this time you have never 
yet once asked me what I mean by the word meaning. 

“ B What then do you mean by the word meamng ’ 

" C Be patient You can only learn the meaning of the word 
meamng from the consideration of the nature of ideas, 
and their connection with things." 

Half a century later, lAdy Welby quoted from this author in Mind 
(i8g6), and complained that " Sense in the meaning sense has never 
yet been taken as a centre to work out from attention, perception, 
memory, judgment, etc, have never been cross-examined from the 
direction of their common relation to a ‘ meamng ’ " And after tiie 
lapse of a further twenty-five years we find Mr Russell admitting 
(" On Propositions What they are and how they mean " Proc. 
■Anst Soc 1919) with the approval of Dr Schiller in the symposium 
" that logicians have done very little towards explainmg the relation 
called ‘ meamng ' " 


160 



THE MEANING OF PHILOSOPHERS i6i 

to such a term in serious argument, as though it had 
some accepted use, or as though the author’s use were 
at once obvious, is a practice to be discredited. 

Dr Schiller began by announcing that the Greek 
language is “so defective that it can hardly be said 
to have a vocabulary for the notion ” of meaning at all; 
and in proceeding to state his own view that “ meaning 
is essentially personal .... what anything means 
depends on who means it,” he found it necessary to 
traverse Mr Russell’s dictum that “ the problem of the 
MEANING of words is reduced to the problem of the 
meaning of images.” Mr Russell replied by en¬ 
deavouring “to give more precision to the definition 
of MEANING by introducing the notion of ‘ mnemic 
causation ’ ” and succeeded thereby in evolving an 
instructive description of metaphysics. “ A word,” he 
explained, “which aims at complete generality, such 
as ‘entity,’ for example, will have to be devoid of 
mnemic effects, and therefore of meaning. In practice, 
this is not the case: such words have verbal associa¬ 
tions, the learning of which constitutes the study of 
metaphj'sics.” Mr Joachim, who elected to stand aside 
from the discussion, professed to find Mr Russell 
“asserting that nobody can possibly think" and con¬ 
fined himself to an analysis of the function of images, 
drawing attention in a foot-note to the fact that for 
Mr Russell meaning appeared (amongst other things) 
as ‘a relation,’ that “a relation ‘constitutes’ meaning, 
and that a word not only ‘ has ’ meaning, but is related 
‘ to its meaning.’ ” 

This whole episode was characterized by Dr Schiller 
six months later (April, 1921, p. 185) as presenting “ the 
usual features of a philosophic discussion. That is to 
say, it reads like a triangular duel, in which each 
participant aims at something different, and according 
to the other misses it, and hits a phantom.” In dealing 
with details he quotes Mr Russell’s remark that “all 
the words in which Dr Schiller endeavours to describe 



i 62 the meaning of MEANING 

his unobservable entities imply that after all he can 
observe them,” as a typical case of “the overriding of 
actual MEANING by verbal, which could hardly be 
surpassed from the writings of Mr Bradley.” 

In July Mr Alfred Sidgwick explained (p. 285) that 
“ MEANING depends on consequences, and truth depends 
on MEANING ; ” and Professor Strong intervened (p. 313) 
as a ‘ critical realist ’ to meet Dr Schiller’s objections 
to Mr Russell and to render the latter’s theory intelli¬ 
gible to Mr Joachim. He illustrated his rendering by 
imagining an explosion. When we hear what we call 
an explosion, “ the sound has not so much acquired, 
as become converted into a meaning. . . . What is 
non-concrete and non-sensuous is always a meaning, 
a sense of that unfathomed beyond which we cannot 
contemplate but only intend. . . . To mean something 
is to conceive or rather treat it as not wholly revealed 
to the mind at the moment.” 

To this Dr Schiller rejoins that Dr Strong always 
confines his attention to the case “ in which an ‘ object ’ 
is said to ‘mean so-and-so.’” This, he thinks, “im¬ 
poses on him the duties of deriving the personal mean¬ 
ing, and of explaining the relativity of ‘ the ’ meaning 
of an object to various cognitive purposes and personal 
meanings” (p. 445). He concludes (p. 447) that “the 
existence of personal meaning remains a pitfall in the 
path of all intellectual ism.” The controversy is pre¬ 
sumably still in progress. 

Contemporaneously with the Symposium on Meaning 
which appeared in Mind, an inquiry into the nature of 
Aphasia was appearing in Brain ^ and during the dis¬ 
cussion of Dr Head’s views the question of meaning 
came to the front. A special memorandum suggested 
by the treatment of ‘semantic aphasia,’ was handed in 
by Dr J. Herbert Parsons,” and it throws interesting 

1 1920 Vol XLIII , Parts II and IV 

“ " The Psychology of ' Meaning ’ in its Relation to Aphasia " 
Ibid , p 441 



THE MEANING OF PHILOSOPHERS 163 


light on the degree of assistance which neurologists 
can be expected to derive from the work of philosophers 
in this held. According to Dr Parsons, at the lowest 
biological level “it would be unwise to deny the 
presence of a plus or minus affective tone—and this is 
the primitive germ of ‘meaning.’” At the perceptual 
level, however, “the relatively undifferentiated psycho¬ 
plasm is differentiated into specialized affective and 
cognitive elements, which are reintegrated, thus under¬ 
going a synthesis which is the ‘ meaning ’ of the given 
experience. Perceptual ‘ meaning ’ suffused with affec¬ 
tive tone, issues in instinctive conative activity.” Thus 
at the end of the completed reaction “the ‘meaning’ 
has become enriched and complicated. . . . This altered 
‘ meaning ’ is stored up, and, though depressed below 
the threshold of consciousness, is capable of "being 
revived. . . . The integration and synthesis of the 
already more plastic psychoplasm results in a higher, 
more complex type of ‘ meaning.’ ” Later the influence 
of social environment makes itself felt, and in the com¬ 
plicated process of social intercourse “ the ultimate 
results are equivalent to an interaction of old and new 
‘ meanings,’ resulting in an infinity of still newer, richer 
and more refined ‘ meanings.’” At this stage “the 
creative activities assume a synergy at a higher level,” 
and “show a projicience hitherto absent.” The child’s 
“ gestures are no longer merely passive signs of his 
mind’s activities, but active indications of his feelings 
and desires. This is the dawn of language.” 1 

A detailed analysis of the Mtnd Symposium might 
have been instructive as a preliminary to the framing 
of a set of definitions, but its technique was unusually 
disappointing,^ and since in any case the metaphysical 
arena of the Old World inevitably suggests to many 
an atmosphere of barren logomachy, we may more 

^ Owing largely to the temperamental incompatibility of the sym- 
posiasts Mr Russell, moreover, has now superseded his contribution 
by the relevant chapters of hi’ Analysis of Mtnd, to which reference 
has already been made (p 54) 



i64 the meaning OF MEANING 

profitably deal with the confusions which arise as 
occasion allows and cite here the procedure of the 
latest co-operative product of the New. The Essays in 
Critical Realism^ which made their appearance in 1920, 
are the work of seven American Professors who have 
revised and redrafted their language until it met the 
approval of all the other essayists. They are the fruits 
of a decade of controversy in a limited controversial 
field, where “ our familiarity with one another’s mean¬ 
ing has enabled us to understand methods of expression 
from which at first we were inclined to dissent.” The 
main issues of the controversy had already been elabor¬ 
ated, as the result of conferences begun in 1908-9, in a 
similar co-operative volume by six Neo-realists. The 
final outcome may be regarded as the clarification of 
the life’s work of a dozen specialists, ail of whom have 
been continuously improving their mutual terminology 
in the full view of the public for over a decade. 

With the earlier volume we need not here concern 
ourselves except to note that in the Introduction, where 
a scrupulous use of words and the importance of clear 
definitions are insisted on, there occur the following 
remarks;— 

“In exact discourse the meaning of every term must be 
reviewed ” , 

" If we cannot express our meaning in exact terms, let us at 
least cultivate literature ’' 

“ Idealism has meant nothmg to the actual psychologist." 

—while in the final essay we find Professor Pitkin 
objecting at a crucial point that Alexander and Nunn 
“treat only the stuff of hallucinatory objects as real, 
leaving the erroneous meanings more or less products 
of a construing mind.” 

Since that date, 1912, the word ‘meaning’ has not 
ceased to play a decisive part in every dispute, and as 
the Critical Realists have had such ample opportunity 
of avoiding any ambiguities into which the Neo- 



THE MEANING OF PHILOSOPHERS 165 

Realists may have fallen, we may, as far as Realism is 
concerned, confine ourselves to their efforts. 

First comes Professor Drake, of Vassar :— 

"Tlie very meaning of ‘ existence ’ involves a definite locus " 
(P 16) 

"The very meanisg of the term ‘relation’ includes refer¬ 
ence to something related " (p ig). 

These two statements are used to lead up to the view 
that perceptual data “cannot be the same existents as 
their causes,” and that we “get back somewhere to 
qualities.” 

It would be a large undertaking, continues Professor 
Lovejoy, to “analyse the meanings” of the formula¬ 
tions of Pragmatism, which “ began as a theory con¬ 
cerning the conditions under which concepts and 
propositions may be said to possess meaning, and 
concerning the nature of that in which all meanings 
must consist” The pragmatist, he holds, ignores the 
patent fact that “ many of our meanings are retro¬ 
spective. . . . No logical hocus-pocus can transub¬ 
stantiate the MEANING ‘yesterday’ into the meaning 
‘ to-morrow ’ . . . . It is, in very truth, a meaning 
intrinsically incapable of directly-experienced fulfil¬ 
ment. . . . Without ever actually experiencing the 
fulfilment of these meanings, we nevertheless have an 
irresistible propensity to believe that some of them are 
in fact valid meanings. ... A judgment is its own 
master in deciding what it means, though not in 
deciding as to the fulfilment of its meanings.” 

According to Professor Pratt, the Neo-Realists 
“performed a most fruitful piece of analysis in insist¬ 
ing that the data presented to our thought consist of 
MEANINGS or natures,” but they did not distinguish 
“between these meanings and the sensational part of 
our mental states on the one hand and the existential 
physical objects to which the meanings are attributed 
on the other.” A number of people might describe 
their conception of anything differently though all 



i66 THE MEANING OF MEANING 

“meant, or thought of, the same thing.” He pro¬ 
ceeds to distinguish (p. 90) between the meaning which 
one entertains in conception “and images which are 
the ‘ vehicle ’ of our meaning. This meaning is that 
which we find directly given to our thought,” and he 
holds “this meaning or datum is often capable of 
exact definition, t.e., it has, or rather ts, a definable 
nature.” Perception, equally with conception, “con¬ 
tains not merely sensuous and revived images but a 
large element of meaning as well.” Usually, All the 
sensed qualities are included within those meant." As 
regards outer reference (p. 92) “this may be regarded 
as part of the datum or meaning of perception, but it 
is an easily distinguishable part.” Thanks to past 
reactions, the quality-group “ of which one is aware, 
directly means more than it is. As a result of all 
one’s past experience it has come to stand for an 
active entity.” This quality-group “means, or tm- 
mediately implies to the individual the presence and, 
to a considerable extent, the nature of some active 
entity of which it is well for him to be aware. It is 
in short tlie means of his perceiving the object." In con¬ 
clusion he maintains that though Critical Realists 
“do not pretend to an exhaustive knowledge of the 
inner nature of physical entities, we have defined them 
sufficiently to know what we mean by*them, and to 
make that meaning perfectly plain to every one but 
the perversely blind.” 

Professor Rogers of Yale, who deals with Error, 
complains that Bosanquet failed to understand the 
question of “ degrees of truth ” because of his “ annoy¬ 
ing refusal to keep sharply separate the varying mean¬ 
ings of terms. It is not a question whether the same 
form of words means the same thing to different people. 
It is a question whether any given meaning singly, 
whatever it may be, is successful in corresponding to 
the fact” (p. 123). Of Mr Joachim’s account of things 
in terms of systems, he remarks that “If we insist on 



THE MEANING OF PHILOSOPHERS 167 

defining the meaning of a fact in terms of its place in 
a system, naturally it will cease to have that meaning 
outside the system ” (p. 125). 

As regards identity “ we naturally make a clear 
distinction between the characters of things as em¬ 
bodied in MEANINGS which we attribute to them, and 
the real existence of these characters in the things 
themselves. . . . The ‘identity of indiscernibles’ ap¬ 
plies to abstract logical meanings, not to existents. 
Meanings we may call the same—provided we can 
detect no difference in them—^just because their ‘char¬ 
acter ’ is all there is to them; but things are not 
necessarily the same when they are alike” (p. 131). 
Professor Holt’s analysis is, he thinks, an “approxim¬ 
ately correct account of what the critical realist intends 
to refer to under the head of essences, or human mean¬ 
ings. But for him the problem of knowledge consists, 
not merely in the presence of these meanings pr data, 
but in their reference to the actual object” (p. 133). 
Professor Perry’s difficulties as regards error vanish 
if we grant the distinction “between the something 
as an existent about which I have a belief, and the some¬ 
thing (as an intellectual content or meaning or essence) 
which I believe about it.” When in error, we have a 
'•MEANING before the mind,” and wrongly suppose that 
it characterises a real object. 

Dr Santayana urges that though without our animal 
bodies “ appearance would lose its seat and its focus, 
and without an external object would lose its signifi¬ 
cance,” we can yet take appearance absolutely and 
“inhibit all reaction and understanding”; but since 
even the passive and immediate data of appearance, 
“its bare signals and language when stupidly gazed 
at” have aesthetic reality, “the special and insidious 
kind of reality opposed to appearance must mean an 
underlying reality, a substance ■ and it had better be 
called by that name.” And he introduces to us 
Essences = U niversals = I ntuited aesthetic data—“ sym- 



i68 THE MEANING OF MEANING 

bols of sense or thought” (p. 165), which may be 
identical with the essences embodied in the substance 
though “the intention and the embodiment remain 
different in existence, origin, date, place, substance, 
function and duration.” 

That the individual’s field of experience “has a 
certain structure, and is shot through with meanings 
and affirmations,” seems to Professor Sellars of Michi¬ 
gan “a matter of undeniable fact.” The chief error 
of much contemporary thought is the refusal to recog¬ 
nize “that thinghood and perception go together” ; in 
other words, in the percipient, “we have the content 
of perception, and over against it in a qualifying way, 
the motor complex of adjustment combined with the 
realistic meanings and expectations which are char¬ 
acteristic of perception.” What is needed is, he holds, 
“a patient and persistent analysis which is able to go 
forward step by step while doing justice to the structure 
and MEANINGS of the individual’s experience ” (p. 197). 
And as regards knowledge of the past, “we can mean 
a reality which no longer exists equally with a reality 
which exists at the time of the intention ” (p. 215). 

Professor Sellars makes the following distinction : 

" Knowledge of other concurrences is different from know¬ 
ledge of the physical world It is a knowledge through asserted 
identity of content, whereas knowledge of the 'physical world 
IS information about data Thus when I mterpret an expression 
on the face of my friend as meaning amusement I use the ex¬ 
pression as a symbol of an experience which I regard as in its 
essentials the same for him as for me " (p 217). 

Finally Professor Strong who examines the nature 
of the ‘datum,’ which he replaces by Santayana’s 
‘ essence ’ (which, as we have seen, is regarded by 
Critical Realism as also equivalent to ‘ meaning ’), con¬ 
cludes that data are in their nature “not existences 
but universals, the bare natures of the objects, in such 
wise that the essence embodied and the essence given 
may be the same.” 



THE MEANING OF PHILOSOPHERS 169 

“ What is given to us in sense-perception,” we learn 
(p. 235), “ is the sensation as a meaning, or to speak 
more correctly what is given is the meaning and not 
the sensation .... That this significance, or meaning, 
or essence is not an existence and not in time and space, 
but, like the meaning when we think of a universal, 
a purely logical entity, is quite credible ”; moreover, 
the datum “ is not properly a sensible fact. We cannot 
actually find it as a feeling, we can only tend towards 
it or MEAN it. . . . A meaning here is not to be 
understood as a peculiar kind of feeling, but as a 
function which the feeling discharges ” (p. 237). 

We need not here attempt to correlate these different 
uses of the term in what claims to be the last achieve¬ 
ment of co-ordinated symbolization. As might have 
been expected this statement with its challenge to Neo- 
Realists, Pragmatists, and Idealists aroused abundant 
controversy, but the one inevitable source of mis¬ 
understanding and disagreement, the omnipresence of 
the term Meaning, was allowed to pass unchallenged. 
It seems to have been accepted without question into 
the vocabulary of American philosophy, for use on all 
occasions of uncertainty,* though to the English reader 
it still happily sounds strange in most of its typical 
contexts. 

But lest the uninitiated should suppose that Meta¬ 
physicians and Critical Realists are peculiar in their 
method, we may turn to the use made of the word by a 
psychologist. For over twenty years the writings of 
Professor Hugo Munsterberg exercised a powerful in¬ 
fluence on thought in England and in Germany, no less 
than in America. His Eternal Values (igog) appeared 
first in German and then in an improved and revised 
form in English. It claims to be carefully and system- 

* Tbe treatment of the term * meaning ’ by Professor Sellars in his 
mdependent volumes, Cntual Realism (1916) and Evolutionary 
Naturalism (1921), is exemplified by the following dictum in the former 

S ) 282) *' As a MXAKiNG, knowledge precedes truth, which is a re- 

ective deepemng of the sense of knowledge m the light of au awakened 
doubt." 



THE MEANING OF MEANING 


170 

atically written, a protest against the impressionistic 
American style of philosophizing, much of which “has 
become antagonistic to the real character of philosophy.” 
Already in his Preface he assures us that sincere con¬ 
viction gave the real aim and meaning to his work. 
On his first page his way of admitting that tastes may 
differ is to say that “the beauties of one school may 
MEAN ugliness to another ” ; on his second the words 
“To profess idealism never means to prove it right” 
indicate that asseveration and proof are not the same ; 
on his third he informs us that “the world longs for a 
new expression of the meaning of life and reality.” 
On page 4 we read that for the sciences to urge criticism 
of their foundations “means that they ask about the real 
value of truth” ; that in practical affairs “the meaning 
of life IS in danger” ; that we need “a new philosophy 
which may give meaning to life and reality.” Page 5— 

" The MEANING of what is valuable must decide our view of 
the world.” 

"Philosophy needs to understand what the fundamental 
MEANING of any valuation is " 

"The philosopher keeps for his own inquiry what the real 
MEANING of special facts may be, and what it means to have 
knowledge of fee world at all " 

Part I is entitled ‘The Meaning of Values’ and on 
the SIX pages 74-79 which reveal “the deciding fact” 
the term ‘ meaning ’ appears no less than sixteen times. 
The deciding fact is that we demand that things recur. 
“We demand that there be a world ; that means that 
our experience be more than just passing experience. 
Here is the original deed which gives eternal meaning 
to our reality ” (p. 75). The world becomes a world 
by Its identical recurrence, and this identity means 
fulfilment, means satisfaction, means value” (p. 79). 

In passing it may be noted that identity does not 
exclude change, for it is postulated that whatever 
changes “ must still present an identity in its changes 
by showing that the change belongs to its own 



THE MEANING OF PHILOSOPHERS 171 
0 comments on commit 28260c0
